Date: Tue, 16 May 1995 18:24:15 -0300 (ADT)
Subject: MathSci

Date: Tue, 16 May 1995 07:08:05 -0400
From: Peter Freyd <pjf@saul.cis.upenn.edu>

Several have asked me about MathSci. It is not, as far as I know,
available to everyone on the internet.  I think you have to talk your
library into subscribing. The version at Penn is accessible only to
people it recogognizes as being from Penn. It is described as follows:

MathSci, produced by the American Mathematical Society (AMS), provides
coverage of the world's literature on mathematics, statistics, and
computer science and their applications in a wide range of
disciplines, including econometrics, operations research, engineering,
physics, biology, and many related fields.  MathSci consists of eight
subfiles:

  Mathematical Reviews. 1940-. Updated monthly, MR consists of
evaluative reviews and abstracts of the mathematical research
literature of the world.

  Current Mathematical Publications, 1985-.  Updated monthly, CMP
contains approximately 3000 newly published titles in advance of being
reviewed.

  Current Index to Statistics, 1975-.  Updated quarterly, produced
jointly by the American Statistical Association and the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics, CIS provides comprehensive coverage on the
literature of Statistics.

  Eugene Strens Recreational Mathematics Collection contains over
4,000 mathematical books, journals, manuscripts, and puzzles archived
by the University of Calgary Libraries.

  Index to Statistics and Probability, 1910-1968, compiled by John
W. Tukey and Ian C. Ross, is an historical statistics subfile of over
25,000 entries.

  ACM Guide to Computer Literature, 1981-1989. Produced by the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), GCL is a comprehensive
index to the computing literature covering over 500 periodicals
including books, conference proceedings and report literature.

  Computing Review, 1984-July 1990.  Produced by the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM), CR consists of evaluative reviews of the
research in computer science and its applications.

  Technical Reports in Computer Science, 1954 -.  Updated quarterly,
the Stanford collection consists of over 40,000 records of technical
reports acquired from more than 135 academic and corporate
institutions.

* * *

  Some titles and abstracts/reviews will have TeX encoding, a
formatting software system.  You must have the TeX software with
AMSFonts in order to restore the encoded records to the typeset form
i.e. correctly formatted.  Instructions for obtaining the software are
available by accessing e-math via the AMS web ( http://e-math.ams.org)
or via telnet ( e-math.ams.org logon: e-math password: e-math ).


